# The Role of Algorithms in Computing (Conceptual Exercises and Solutions)

## Algorithms

**1.1-1**

Give a real-world example in which one of the following computational problems appears: sorting, determining the best order for multiplying matrices, or finding  the convex hull.

> Sorting: Points tables in football leagues, ranking Amazon search results etc.
>
> Best order for multiplying matrices: **Didn't find a good application**
>
> Convex Hull: Drawing boundaries of a city with major locations as points inside.

**1.1-2**

Other than speed, what other measures of efficiency might one use in a real-world setting?

> Memory usage, compute (CPU usage, etc), easier to debug?

**1.1-3**

Select a data structure that you have seen previously, and discuss its strengths and limitations.

> Arrays, strengths are simple to store day, non-trivial sorting + searching and limitations are we can't dynamically change size.

**1.1-4**

How are the shortest-path and traveling-salesman problems given above similar? How are they different?

> Similarities: Both traverse graphs, both optimize for time
>
> Dissimilarities: Shortest path doesn't have any requirement to travel to certain vertices, travelling salesman needs to come back to the starting point.

**1.1-5**

Come up with a real-world problem in which only the best solution will do. Then come up with one in which a solution that is “approximately” the best is good enough.

> Payments: Should work perfectly, and preferably instantly
>
> AI Customer Care: Approximate solutions still work pretty well.

## Algorithms as a technology

**1.2-1**

Give an example of an application that requires algorithmic content at the application level, and discuss the function of the algorithms involved.

> Google Maps: Shortest path finding algorithm with weighted edges on graphs

**1.2-2**

Suppose we are comparing implementations of insertion sort and merge sort on the same machine. For inputs of size $n,$ insertion sort runs in $8n^2$ steps, while merge sort runs in $64n\lg{n}$ steps. For which values of $n$ does insertion sort beat merge sort?

> Using Desmos

| n | Insertion Sort | Merge Sort |
|---|----------------|------------|
|43 |14792           | 14933      |
|44 |15488           | 15373      |


**1.2-3**

What is the smallest value of $n$ such that an algorithm whose running time is $100n^2$ runs faster than an algorithm whose running time is $2^n$ on the same machine?

> Using Desmos

| n | Polynomial     | Exponential|
|---|----------------|------------|
|14 |19600           | 16384      |
|15 |22500           | 32768      |

## Problems

**1-1 Comparison of running times**

For each function $f(n)$ and time $t$ in the following table, determine the largest size $n$ of a problem that can be solved in time $t$, assuming that the algorithm to solve the problem takes $f(n)$ microseconds.

> Remember that $1 \mu s = 10^{-6}s,$ and use Python or Desmos to calculate factorials etc.

| |1 second|1 minute|1 hour|1 day|1 month|1 year|1 century|
|-|-|-|-|-|-|-|-|
|$\lg{n}$|$2^{10^6}$|$2^{6 \cdot 10^{7}}$|$2^{36 \cdot 10^{8}}$| $2^{864 \cdot 10^{8}}$|$2^{25920 \cdot 10^{8}}$ | $2^{315360 \cdot 10^{8}}$| $2^{31556736 \cdot 10^{8}}$|
|$\sqrt{n}$|$10^{12}$|$36\cdot 10^{14}$|$1296\cdot 10^{16}$|$746496\cdot 10^{16}$|$6718464\cdot 10^{18}$|$994519296\cdot 10^{18}$|$995827586973696\cdot 10^{16}$|
|$n$|$10^{6}$|$6\cdot 10^{7}$|$36\cdot 10^{8}$|$864\cdot 10^{8}$|$2592\cdot 10^{9}$|$31536\cdot 10^{9}$|$31556736\cdot 10^{8}$|
|$n\lg{n}$|$62746$|$2801417$|$133378058$|$2755147513$|$71870856404$|$797633893349$|$68654697441062$|
|$n^2$|$1000$|$7745$|$60000$|$293938$|$1609968$|$5615692$|$56175382$|
|$n^3$|$100$|$391$|$1532$|$4420$|$13736$|$31593$|$146677$|
|$2^n$|$19$|$25$|$31$|$36$|$41$|$44$|$51$|
|$n!$|$9$|$11$|$12$|$13$|$15$|$16$|$17$|